---
date: 2016-10-16T17:44:18-07:00
title: 'November 2016: California Propositions'
menu:
  main:
    name: Nov 2016 CA Props
---

Here are my current thoughts on the statewide propositions on the November 2016
ballot.

## Yes on 51?

Bonds for school construction. In general I am in favor of higher taxes to spend
more on schools, and bonds are a good alternative to taxes for construction
costs. Both state parties support this.  Opposition is mostly the hard-line
anti-taxers... and also Jerry Brown, whose opinions I usually respect but don't
always agree with. It is a shame that any of this goes to charter schools. But
on the whole this seems worthwhile. Looking at the "general fund debt-service
ratio" shows that this would not increase the amount we spend on debt service by
an enormous amount.

## No on 52?
This one's weird. Basically, it takes an existing practice where the state gets
more federal money for "free" for hospitals and encodes in the constitution.  It
also ensures that all of the money related to this practice goes to hospitals
rather than some of being diverted to the general budget.

(Specifically, hospitals pay a fee to the state, and the federal government
gives matching funds of an equal amount to the state. The latter money must go
to healthcare purposes but the state can use the former money for non-healthcare
purposes, and currently diverts about a quarter of it. This proposition would
prevent that part from being diverted.)

Its financial support comes mostly from hospitals (ie, hospital CEOs). It was
opposed by some health workers but they withdrew their opposition and are now
neutral. (My impression is that they originally had their own different version
of this ballot measure but withdrew it or it failed to qualify.)

It's unclear to me what happens if the federal government changes the
program --- are we stuck with this fee anyway since it's in the constitution?
(There are clauses about it not taking effect in certain conditions, which might
be addressing this concern. And none of the No people are raising this concern.)

The program enshrined by the proposition basically already exists, so I don't
think it's necessary to pass this in order to continue receiving the federal
funding. The big question is --- how do I feel about the diversion of $900
million dollars from the hospital fees to the general fund during the recent
budget crisis? On the one hand, this is hospital money and maybe it should be
guaranteed to go to healthcare. On the other hand --- there really was a budget
crisis, and part of that is because so much of California's money is tied to a
specific cause, removing flexibility from the state legislature. Was that really
a bad use of the hospital money?

As of now I'm leaning towards no, primarily because a "no" vote won't lose the
federal matching funds but will keep the state budget more flexible.

## NO ON 53
We have too many propositions already. Currently voters do not need to vote on
bonds that will be paid back from usage fees (as opposed to taxes). This would
add a requirement for these bonds for large projects ($2 billion+) to be voted
on at the statewide level.  This is bad because:

- Too many propositions already!
- This would mean that a regional project whose use fees are only paid by local
  which has some state involvement could be rejected by voters from the other
  side of the state.
- Specifically, it's likely to be used to tie up high-speed rail construction
  (a project which I support).

## Yes on 54?

This proposition does two separate things:

- All bills in the legislature will need to be published online 72 hours before
  vote.
- The legislature needs to record proceedings not just of the main legislative
  meetings but of all open committee meetings and make the recordings available
  online within 24 hours. It also changes regulations so that these recordings
  may be legally used in political and commercial ads.

This seems basically reasonable, and is supported by groups like the League of
Women Voters.

I have two concerns.

- I worry that if a bill has minor flaws in it that are discovered a day or two
  after the publication, the flaws will be left in rather than fixed because
  that would restart the 72-hour clock.  This is especially the case for
  important bills where lots of negotiation is required.  Hopefully these little
  flaws can be fixed in follow-up laws, but look at Obamacare: a glorified typo
  in one sentence led not to making the obvious fix, but to
  a
  [multi-year Supreme Court case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_v._Burwell)
  aimed at fully overturning the law.

- I'm mixed on the impact of allowing legislature recordings to be used in
  ads. From a freedom of information/transparency perspective this is a good
  thing. But it's likely to lead to awful campaign ads and force legislators to
  be even more focused on making sure every individual sound bite of anything
  they ever say is not misinterpretable, making complex discussions of complex
  issues even rarer.

It is also mostly funded by conservative billionaire Charles Munger.

All in all, I am tentatively pro but could be convinced otherwise.

## YES ON 55

4 years ago, we voted to slightly increase income tax on the rich (>$250K for
individuals, >$500K for couples) as well as a regressive sales tax
increase. These are expiring now, and Prop 55 renews the progressive income tax.

This does not affect anyone making less than $250K (individuals)/$500 (couples).

It is pretty clear that people making that much money have been doing just fine
in California over the last 4 years and this tax hasn't exactly forced rich
people to run out of the state.

I recognize that there's a reasonable argument to be made where this is somewhat
of a bait-and-switch: first the tax got wider approval than it might have
otherwise by being billed as a "temporary" tax, and now that it's expiring we
can push for Prop 55 by describing it as "don't cut taxes on the rich".

But frankly, I wish this proposition was raising the income tax further. At the
very least, this is the wrong time to effectively cut taxes on the rich.


## YES ON 56

This increases the tax on tobacco by a fair amount, and also includes
e-cigarettes as tobacco products. Currently California's cigarette tax is the
37th highest in the nation; this will raise it to be 13th highest (but still
well below, say, New York).

Nicotine addiction and tobacco are awful products with major public health
impacts. I don't believe in prohibition, but I am fine with high taxes on them.
E-cigarettes are just as addictive as tobacco, and vaping sets off my wife's
allergies just as much as cigarettes do, and they should be treated similarly
under the law.

## YES ON 57

This increases access to parole for felons convicted of nonviolent crimes. It
also makes judges, not prosecutors, solely responsible for deciding whether to
try juveniles as adults in court. Anything to end our culture of incarceration
and our overcrowded prisons seems good.

## YES ON 58

18 years ago, anti-Hispanic bigots made teaching students with immersion in
non-English languages in public schools much more difficult. (They sometimes
voiced their concerns as concerns that Hispanic kids were not being taught
English at all but as far as I can tell this was specious.)  This would return
that control to the local level. Sounds right to me.

## Yes on 59, sadly

Advisory questions are stupid and shouldn't be on the ballot, but given that
it's here, it's better that we send the message that Citizens United sucks than
the opposite. Thanks a lot, legislature.

## NO ON 60

This would require the use of condoms in porn. I understand the arguments for it
but the arguments against are much more convincing. This seems to be a solution
in search of a problem --- the California pornography industry's existing
anti-HIV programs seem to work just fine.  It seems to also create privacy
issues for porn performers.  This also creates a weird private right of action
where the random person suing under the law actually gets to personally keep 25%
of the penalty! WTF? Basically everyone respectable opposes this.

The only reason I could be convinced to support this is if somebody was able to
make a data-driven argument that the vocal and publicly active adult film
performers who are all unequivocably opposed to this proposition fail to
adequately represent the majority of porn performers and that there's a silent
oppressed majority of people who really wish that there was some collective
action to allow them to use condoms. I have not yet seen this argument made in a
compelling manner.

## Unsure on 61; lean no.

This proposition intentionally ties the hands of state agencies, forbidding them
from paying more for drugs than the US Department of Veteran Affairs
does. Probably going to be the most expensive ballot measure ever (No has
already raised $70 million!?!)  "No" is funded by Big Pharma (boo); "Yes" is
funded by the AIDS Healthcare Foundation, the out-of-touch organization who also
brought us the terrible 60.  It's unclear if it will actually accomplish its
goals --- it might lead to drug companies refusing to sell drugs to California,
or raising the VA prices (though there are some legal caps on VA prices).

The League of Pissed-Off Voters and Chronicle are both opposed; I tend to agree
with them when they agree with each other.

## YES ON 62 (not tricky 66!)

Repeal the state death penalty. This is a no-brainer for me: the death penalty
is immoral both in theory and in its racist and expensive practice. California
should not be part of it.  (Don't get confused: there's another death penalty
proposition which is awful and should lose. Yes on 62, no on tricky 66.)

(I note that Alameda County Sheriff Gregory Ahern is opposed. I plan to remember
that when he is up for election, I guess maybe in 2018.)

## YES ON 63

This prohibits the possession of large-capacity ammunition magazines and would
require most individuals to pass a background check and obtain authorization
from the California Department of Justice to purchase ammunition.

Most of what it achieves was already accomplished by the legislature earlier
this year; this is primarily grandstanding for Gavin Newsom's future campaigns.

But you know what? I want to live in a place where you pander by enacting
redundant gun control laws rather than a place where you pander by toeing the
NRA line.

The new changes that this introduces seem generally positive, at least if you
hope to live in a world with less gun proliferation.

## YES ON 64

The prohibition on marijuana serves no public health benefit and is a major
component of our racist police state. The time for this is overdue. The only
downside I can see is that it in the short run it may hurt the economy of some
northern counties which are driven by the black market, but in the big picture
this is far better.

## NO ON TRICKY 65
This is a bullshit attempt to look like you're supporting the environment that
is intended as a sneaky poison pill for 67: ie, if it gets more votes than 67,
67 may not take effect.

It also would screw over grocers by not permitting them to charge for paper
bags, which actually do cost them money and do provide an incentive for them to
suppor plastic bag bans.

15 billion single-use plastic bags are distributed in CA every year even with
the huge number of local bans. We can do better.

## NO ON TRICKY 66

If you look at the high expense of the death penalty and say "obviously the way
to fix this is to prevent innocent people from having due process and kill them
faster instead", this is the proposition for you, and also you are an awful
human being. Vote yes on 62 and no on 66.

## YES ON 67

Large parts of California (SF, Alameda County, unincorporated Marin, San Mateo,
and LA counties as well as most of their cities, etc) have successfully
eliminated single-use plastic bags and used a small fee on other single-use bags
to effectively encourage the use of reusable bags.

These laws work, which is why the state legislature passed a law to move this
from 40% of the population to the whole state.

The plastic bag industry halted the law by putting this referendum on the
ballot.  Don't let them win.  And please ignore their tricky Prop 65, which
looks like it puts the bag fee somewhere "better" but screws over the grocers
who are supporting 67 and also sneakily attempts to override 67.  Vote yes on 67
and No on Tricky 65.
