---
date: 2018-10-25T12:00:01-07:00
title: 'November 2018: Candidates'
menu:
  main:
    name: Nov 2018 Candidates
    weight: 3
---

Here are my current thoughts on candidates on the November 2018 ballot in
Berkeley, in ballot order.

<!--more-->

You can also read my thoughts
on [propositions]({{< relref "201811-props.md" >}}), or see
a [cheat sheet]({{< relref "201811-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) summary.

Most of these races are statewide "Democrat vs Republican" races which don't
require much thought. The Assembly race is the most challenging race on the
ballot.

## Governor: Gavin Newsom ☹

Newsom will certainly be better than Cox. See [my comments in the primary]({{<
relref "201811-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) on why Newsom fails to excite me.


## Lieutenant Governor: Ed Hernandez?

My preferred candidate didn't win the primary. It's been hard to be motivated to
spend time researching this relatively unimportant position.

Based on very rudimentary research, a legislator/doctor seems more qualified
than an ambassador/housing developer.

Thoughts, anyone?

## Secretary of State: Alex Padilla

Democrat vs Republican.  (Can't find any more recent news on the handwriting
analysis issue I discussed in the primary, though.)


## Controller: Betty Yee

Haven't heard anything bad about her in this role.  Democrat vs Republican.


## Treasurer: Fiona Ma

Democrat vs Republican. Frustrating that Ma didn't drop her endorsement of a
lying transphobic SF school board candidate (who has since dropped out). But
hey, still better than her opponent.


## Attorney General: Xavier Becerra

Democrat vs Republican.

## Insurance Commissioner: Ricardo Lara?

Apparently Poizner was reasonably respected the last time he held this job as a
Republican, and he was pretty non-partisan about it.  And maybe he has a better
sense for the nuts and bolts of insurance than Lara. On the other hand, he
pivoted sharply into racist anti-immigrant policies when running for Governer in
2010, and I don't take his recent apologies too seriously.

Lara seems to have his heart in the right place, even though his campaigning
seems to be a lot about policies that the Commissioner doesn't actually have any
control over.


## Member, State Board of Equalization, 2nd District: Malia Cohen

Democrat vs Republican.  Cohen isn't my favorite local politician, and
apparently this board was stripped of most of its power recently due to
corruption, but eh.


### US Senator: KEVIN DE LEON

As I said in June:

You could do worse for a Senator than Dianne Feinstein, but you could do a whole
lot better. She's more conservative than the state, too much of a hawk, and did
an awful job of opposing Trump's nominees (voting no on most of them, but
without making any statements ahead of time, let alone using her seniority to
help shepherd her caucus towards unity).  I'm voting for the most promising
Democrat for that reason alone.  De Léon isn't perfect either (he apparently
could have been a lot more proactive in dealing with issues of sexual harassment
in the legislature), but on the whole seems fine.


### US Representative: BARBARA LEE

Still great.


### State Assembly, District 15: ??? (very slight lean Jovanka Beckles)

This is the big one.

If it weren't for the issue of housing, there's little question I'd vote for
Jovanka Beckles. She's a part of the Richmond Progressive Alliance (like Gayle
McLaughlin who I'm supporting for Governor). She refuses corporate money and (at
least during the primary) had by far the largest number of small-money
donors. She's endorsed by Barbara Lee!  Most of her platform is excellent, and
my impression is she got things done in Richmond.  Her [housing
platform](http://www.jovanka.org/stand#housing) is more nuanced than I
originally thought. But she has stated that the only housing crisis in the Bay
Area is the affordable housing crisis (although she also claims, believably,
that this was [taken out of
context](https://www.jovanka.org/in_detail_big_money_for_big_smears#development)),
and is opposed to large-scale market-rate housing development. She opposes SB827
and is skeptical about transit-based development, though she does support AB
2923 (building units on BART land) and has some other good ideas on
housing... but not on building enough of it. A huge amount of the "pro-Beckles"
campaign arguments are just descriptions of Wicks' donors --- and while I do
find the list of those supporting Wicks to be a bit concerning, it feels like
it's the entirety of her campaign these days!

Buffy Wicks has raised the most money, primarily from large donations from
out-of-district sources. Her main prior experience is being a big part of
Obama's campaign and administration.  She just moved here two years ago, though
she did live in SF and Oakland a bit last decade.  She is by far the most
pro-housing-development of the candidates... maybe even a little too much so for
me. For example, she's was the only major candidate in the primaries to not
support repeal of Costa-Hawkins (Prop 10!), which would allowing municipalities
to enact rent control on post-70s buildings and single-family homes, as well as
allow vacancy control.  Instead, she supports reform that would allow the cutoff
to change over time (and isn't sure about the vacancy control aspect, last I
checked). It's hard for me to vote for somebody who moved to the district even
more recently than me and who seems to have zero connections to or support from
any local community organizations.  She may be the most skilled of the
candidates at getting things done in politics, but does she know how to avoid
the traps Senator Wiener fell into recently in unveiling SB827 without working
with affordable housing advocates? I called her office and they gave me her cell
phone number and we had a long talk a week before the primary. I suspect that of
all the candidates, she would have the most success getting things done in
Sacramento (for better or for worse, she's pals with probable future Governor
Newson), and I do think her housing policies are better than Beckles'. But her
minimal connection to the district (and frankly, her support from the more
corporate side of the Democratic party) concerns me.

I was also a bit weirded out by seeing [how white her primary victory party
was](https://twitter.com/BuffyWicks/status/1004225926995955713) in this
[majority-minority
district](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/California%27s_15th_State_Assembly_district).
(Perhaps she noticed the same thing, as her recent mailings have been chock full
of photos of black politicians who have endorsed her... very few of whom are
actually from the district.)

My feelings on Wicks are summed up by this direct quote: "I text with Gavin". Is
having the ear of the man who unfortunately will probably be governor a useful
thing for a legislator? Yes! Is being excited about a man whose main
accomplishments (outside of marriage work) consist of giving proud speeches
about programs he opposed until they passed going to impress me with your
judgement and specific knowledge of local issues? No!

This [Berkeleyside article on an October
debate](https://www.berkeleyside.com/2018/10/08/strong-policy-differences-emerge-between-ad15-candidates-jovanka-beckles-and-buffy-wicks)
does a great job of highlighting concrete differences in their policy
positions. I think single-payer healthcare is a good example of their
differences. Both support it in the abstract. Getting California to enact
statewide single-payer is a major priority for Beckles.  However, most proposed
paths to funding California single-payer depend on the federal government
allowing federal funds to support this system, which is unlikely under
Trump. Wicks's reaction is to deprioritize direct work on California
single-payer until after Trump. I don't think Wicks is wrong about the
likelihood of successfully launching California single-payer under Trump... but
that doesn't necessarily mean that working to pass it now (and move it even more
towards being a key plank of the Democratic party as soon as possible) is a bad
idea.

I was pretty torn in the primary, and ended up voting for Beckles at the last
minute. I'm still pretty torn, but leaning towards Beckles.

## Judges: Maybe no on Carol Corrigan, yes on everyone else?

There are 8 yes/no judge confirmation elections on my ballot: Carol A. Corrigan,
Leondra R. Kruger, James M. Humes, Sandra Margulies, James A. Richman, Marla
Miller, Peter John Siggins, Alison M. Tucher, Jon B. Streeter, and Barbara
Jones.

It's hard to find too many details on them.  The main thing I've found are
people suggesting a "no" vote on Corrigan based on her dissent from [In re
Marriage Cases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_re_Marriage_Cases), the
decision which legalized same-gender marriage in California until Prop 8.  But
also that she is a recently-outed lesbian herself --- it leaves me with an odd
feeling as a straight person punishing an LGBT person for an anti-LGBT
ruling. The [SF League of Pissed Off
Voters](http://www.theleaguesf.org/#judges), who generally have sound stances,
have a slight recommendation based on minimal research to vote no on Margulies,
Richman, and Miller as well as Corrigan.

In practice, it's hard to imagine any judge losing re-election without a
concerted campaign to vote no, so it's hard to feel too bad about my lack of
knowledge here.


## State Superintendent of Public Instruction: TONY THURMOND

As I said in June:

Thurmond is currently my representative in the Assembly; the big election for
his seat is happening because he's running for this office.  His opponent is
Marshall Tuck, former president of a public charter school organization.  This
is essentially a public-schools-and-teachers vs charter-schools
election. (Admittedly, Tuck claims to want to outlaw for-profit charter schools,
though who knows if this would actually be a priority, and it's not under the
control of this position anyway. I have heard positive things about Tuck from
people whose opinions I respect, but even those folks also really like
Thurmond.) I am pretty firmly in the public education camp and am excited to
vote for Thurmond.  Maybe once Ida is actually in public school my optimistic
opinion of public school teachers will lower, but I'll cross that bridge when I
come to it.


## Alameda County Assessor: Phong La

As I said in June:

The assessor's office calculates the value of a property (only when it is sold
or significantly upgraded, thanks to Prop 13) and thus its property tax. The
race seems to be between an outsider (Phong La, who's somewhat of a community
activist as well as a real estate attorney) and an insiders (Jim Johnson, who
works in the Assessor's office).  Honestly I want to see an assessor candidate
who'll speak out against Prop 13; that doesn't seem to describe any of the
candidates, but La is at least [endorsed by the anti-Prop 13 group Evolve
CA](https://www.evolve-ca.org/2018-primary-election/).  Good enough for me, I
guess.


## Berkeley Rent Board: ?

This is a pretty important one, but I haven't had the time to fully research it
yet. We get to vote for five members.  María Poblet, James Chang, Paola Laverde,
Soli Alpert, and John Selawsky is the [slate chosen by the Berkeley Tenants
Convention](https://berkeleyrentboard2018.org/). I have not done enough research
to decide if that's convincing.


## Berkeley School Board: Ty Alper, Julie Sinai, Ka'dijah Brown?

These candidates appear to basically be the establishment slate (one incumbent,
two who co-endorse with him).

The other options are: Abdur Sikder, who has no direct connection to BUSD and
does not impress me any more than the last two times he showed up on my
ballot. Norma Harrison, a perennial candidate who runs on what is essentially a
school abolition platform. And Dru Howard, who skipped the LWV candidate forum
and didn't respond to Berkeleyside's candidate questionnaire. Hard not to just
go with the establistment.


## AC Transit Director (at-large): Dollene Jones?

So this is an incumbent (who's been on the board since 2010, and who has had a
variety of scandals including a domestic violence case), vs a retired bus driver
who has run and lost 4 times recently.  I can't find many endorsements at all in
this race --- other than the East Bay Express, who endorsed the challenger
Jones.

When Jones ran for director two years ago, I said that while the idea of voting
for a queer woman of color who represents the transit system's employees appeals
to me, I feel uncomfortable voting for her without first finding any
organization who endorses her in this particular election. And hey! There's an
organization that endorsed her this time!  So sure, I'll vote for Jones.


## Berkeley Auditor: JENNY WONG

It's easy to miss this one, hidden on the final page after the local propositions.

Jenny Wong is endorsed by basically everybody from the incumbent Auditor and her
predecessor to the winning and losing candidate for mayor in 2016. (Oh, and the
emeritus rabbi of Kehilla --- looks like she's a member.)

Vladislav Davidzon is literally a Berkeleyside comments troll, obsessed with the
belief that city employee pay and benefits is the biggest problem facing
Berkeley.

The choice is easy.
