---
date: 2018-05-28T23:40:13-07:00
title: 'June 2018: Candidates'
menu:
  main:
    name: June 2018 Candidates
    weight: 3
---

Here are my current thoughts on candidates on the November 2016 ballot in
Berkeley, in ballot order.  (Not all writeups are finished yet.)


You can also read my thoughts
on [propositions]({{< relref "201806-props.md" >}}), or see
a [cheat sheet]({{< relref "201806-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) summary.

On the whole, I've found fewer candidates to be excited about than in past
years, and lots of races where I'm finding it hard to come to a decision.

## Governor: John Chiang? Delaine Eastin?

This race, which led to my
[https://twitter.com/glasser/status/990343633588047872](most popular tweet of
all time), somehow manages to fail to excite me. I moved to San Francisco in the
Newsom era and think of him mostly as somebody who loved to claim credit for
popular initiatives that he had actually opposed (say, Healthy SF).  While his
work on same-sex marriage is laudable, I found it hard to like much else about
him. I'm sure he'd manage to do some good things as governor, but I'm not going
to vote for him in the primary.

Villaraigosa appears to be the SoCal version of Newsom. And he's a big charter
school supporter and skeptical of single-payer. I don't think I can bring myself
to vote for him even in a game-theory "keep the Republicans off the ballot"
strategy.

John Chiang has alwasy struck me as competent. I hadn't heard of Delaine Eastin
before a few months ago but her work in education is legit and she has most of
the lefty endorsements.  They both seem fine.  I only wish I knew which one had
more of a chance to make it to #2 under Newsom (realistically, it's neither).


## Lieutenant Governor: Gayle McLaughlin

This position barely matters. (Newsom is running for governor on his mayoral
record, not his term as LtGov.)

I don't know too much about Richmond politics, but the basic outline is that
Richmond had been a company town run by Chevron until the Richmond Progressive
Alliance came along and won several City Council seats, and McLaughlin won two
terms as mayor. They worked to remove tax perks from Chevron, reduce pollution,
and improve the police department via community policing while reducing crime.
McLaughlin is now running for lieutenant governor against some random
ambassador. She's got my vote.


## Secretary of State: Alex Padilla

I've generally been happy with what I've heard of his policies so far, with the
exception of the strange decision to [fight in court to defend a sloppy practice
of ignoring absentee ballots based on handwriting
analysis](https://slate.com/news-and-politics/2018/05/california-is-quietly-disenfranchising-thousands-of-voters-based-on-their-handwriting.html)
(despite claiming to support the legislative solution to the same problem). I
don't see any reason to vote for any of his challenges, though.


## Controller: Betty Yee

Haven't heard anything bad about her in this role.


## Treasurer: ?

Haven't heard anything particularly compelling about any candidate.


## Attorney General: Dave Jones? Xavier Becerra?

Have heard nice things about both of them.  Not really clear on how to
choose. Jones may be better on opposing the death penalty?

## Insurance Commissioner: ?

Haven't been able to learn much exciting here.


## Member, State Board of Equalization, 2nd District: Nobody?

Apparently this board was stripped of most of its power recently due to
corruption.  And none of the candidates seem particularly impressive.  Might
just leave this one blank.


### US Senator: KEVIN DE LEON

You could do worse for a Senator than Dianne Feinstein, but you could do a whole
lot better. She's more conservative than the state, too much of a hawk, and did
an awful job of opposing Trump's nominees (voting no on most of them, but
without making any statements ahead of time, let alone using her seniority to
help shepherd her caucus towards unity).  I'm voting for the most promising
Democrat for that reason alone.  But even if I loved Feinstein, I'd be tempted
to vote for the Democrat polling second to try to keep Republicans off the
ballot; according to at least one poll, the top Republican is a literal
neo-Nazi.  De Leon seems fine.


### US Representative: BARBARA LEE

Still great.


### State Assembly, District 15: Rochelle Pardue-Okimoto?

This is the big one.  There are a lot of candidates here who seem sorta OK to me, and none that really excite me.

Buffy Wicks has raised the most money, primarily from out-of-district
sources. Her claim to fame is being part of Obama's campaign and administration.
She just moved here last year, and to the best of my knowledge has not lived in
the Bay Area before.  She is by far the most pro-housing-development of the
candidates... maybe even a little too much so for me. For example, she's the
only major candidate to not support repeal of Costa-Hawkins, which would
allowing municipalities to enact rent control on post-70s buildings as well as
allow vacancy control (which would significantly improve the negative effects of
rent control).  Instead, she supports reform that would allow the cutoff to
change over time.  I'm tempted to support her as a YIMBY, but it's hard for me
to vote for somebody who moved to the district even more recently than me and
who seems to have zero connections to or support from any local community
organizations.  She may be the most skilled of the candidates at getting things
done in politices, but does she know how to avoid the traps Senator Wiener fell
into recently in unveiling SB827 without working with affordable housing
advocates? I hope to get a chance to talk to her directly before the election.

Ben Bartlett is my City Council member. I sure wish I could be a wholehearted
supporter of the only politician who recognizes me on the street.  And he even
ended up supporting for the 2902 Adeline project I mentioned in my [write-up of
his last candidacy](http://vote.davidglasser.net/post/201611-candidates/), just
like he whispered in my ear that he would do during the zoning meeting... even
though during that same meeting he gave a [firey profanity-laced tirade against
it](http://www.berkeleyside.com/2016/10/31/new-housing-okd-in-berkeley-as-yimbys-win-the-night).
But it doesn't fill me with confidence that his main accomplishment was
something he campaigned against.

Rochelle Pardue-Okimoto is a nurse and El Cerrito official. She came in second
in [East Bay For Everyone's pro-housing
scorecard](https://eastbayforeveryone.org/election-2018/) behind Wicks (and is
the candidate most supportive of Wiener's SB827 bill to increase height limits
near transit hubs).  She is very focused on improving healthcare in California
and saving Alta Bates Hospital (where she works!).  As the most pro-housing
candidate with a real connection to the district, I'm leaning towards voting for
her.

If it weren't for the issue of housing, I'm sure I'd vote for Jovanka
Beckles. She's a part of the Richmond Progressive Alliance (like Gayle
McLaughlin who I'm supporting for Governor). She refuses corporate money and (I
believe) has the largest number of individual donors.  I support her whole
platform... except for her stance on housing, which while well-intended, doesn't
seem to include increasing housing supply.  It's tough for me to not vote for
somebody with the rest of her platform, but I don't think I can right now.

Andy Katz, Dan Kalb, and Judy Appel all seem basically fine on non-housing
issues but unexciting and not great on housing.


## Superior Court Judge, Office 11: ?

tba


## State Superintendent of Public Instruction: TONY THURMOND

tba

## Alameda County Superintendent of Schools: L. Karen Monroe?

tba


## Alameda County Board of Education, Area 1: Joaquin Rivera?

tba

## Alameda County Assessor: Phong La?

tba

## Alameda County Auditor-Controller/Clerk-Recorder: ?

tba

## Alameda County District Attorney: PAMELA PRICE

tba

## Alameda County Sheriff-Coroner: N.O. CONFIDENCE

tba

## Alameda County Treasurer-Tax Collector: Hank Levy?

tba
