---
date: 2018-05-28T23:40:13-07:00
title: 'June 2018: Propositions'
menu:
  main:
    name: June 2018 Props
    weight: 4
---

Here are my current thoughts on the propositions on the June 2016 ballot.

You can also read my thoughts
on [candidates]({{< relref "201806-candidates.md" >}}), or see
a [cheat sheet]({{< relref "201806-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) summary.

## State-wide propositions

### Yes on 68

Bonds for parks, climate adaptation, water, flood protection, etc. Supported by
the LWV, environmental groups, Democrats. Opposed by Howard Jarvis and a few
Republicans.  In general I'd rather we fund our projects via taxes rather than
bonds, but otherwise this seems just fine.

### YES ON 69

This seems to be a bit of inside baseball. Last year, the legislature increased
some taxes and fees on gasoline, diesel and new vehicles (which still are
embarrassingly low for the developed world). Due to various handcuffs placed on
the state by another Prop-13-era proposition (the Gann limit), the state has a
hard spending limit which can only change based on population changes and cost
of living increases.  So any attempt to create new government programs funded by
new taxes can run up against this spending limit, which can only be circumvented
by more propositions. So this proposition exempts revenue raised by last year's
bill from the spending limit. It also ensures that the money raised by it are
only spent on transportation purposes; I don't love ballot-box budgeting, but
this proposition comes from the legislature, so that's probably fine.

It would be better to just pass a proposition to repeal the Gann limit, but in
the meantime I'm happy to chip away at its effects.

### No on 70

This is the only proposition on my ballot where I can't characterize one side in
the official arguments as "nobody" or "a few Republicans" or "Howard Jarvis and
friends" --- it's the only proposition with elected Democrats on both sides, as
Governor Brown is a proponent, along with a bunch of Republicans. It got on the
ballot as part of a compromise needed to get a 2/3 vote last year to extend
cap-and-trade.  It's unclear that Brown actually cares if it passes, as long as
he upheld his side of the bill by getting the proposition on the ballot. Its
main effect is to require a one-time 2/3 legislative vote in 2024 to continue to
use cap-and-trade funds.  Nobody else who I respect seems to think this is a
good idea.

### Yes on 71

Right now, state propositions can take effect before the votes are counted. This
makes them take effect after the votes are counted. It was put on the ballot by
**unanimous** vote of the legislature. The only opposition comes from this one
random guy who has been writing arguments against proposals that everyone else
supports since the 80s (with a strawman argument about child molesters). Sounds
fine to me.

### Yes on 72?

This one allows businesses like vineyards to add rainwater capture systems
without triggering a reassessment and property tax increase. (Well, it lets
anybody do this, but adding a rainwater system to your house is unlikely to
count as a significant enough addition to trigger a reassessment.)  These
exceptions already exist for other safety and environmental improvements like
solar panels and fire sprinklers.  Ending Prop 13's disincentive to improve your
property would be better than these piecemeal improvements, but sure, this seems
like a fine thing to do in a drought.

## Bay Area (SF, Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma Counties)

### YES ON RM3!

It is a travesty that the cheapest transbay BART round trip is more expensive
than the most expensive Bay Bridge round trip. Even if all this proposition did
was raise Bay Bridge prices to make the more responsible travel method more
cost-competitive and set the increased revenue on fire, I'd consider voting for
it. But fortunately, this proposition will also fund a bunch of good projects,
like new BART cars (increasing the transbay BART capacity by 30%) and Bay Trail
improvements. It also will fund some questionable highway projects, but that's
the cost of writing a proposition that's able to pass, I guess.

## Alameda County

### YES ON A

A new Alameda County sales tax to improve child care and preschool for low and
middle income children.  As a parent of a toddler I know how expensive and
important child care is. Sales taxes are unfortunately regressive, but Prop 13
limits how much can be raised via property taxes, and this seems to be
near-universally supported.
