---
date: 2020-11-03T12:00:00Z
title: 'November 2020: Propositions'
menu:
  main:
    name: Nov 2020 Props
    weight: 3
---

Here are my current thoughts on the propositions on the November 2020
ballot. (I've done an initial round of research on the California and Berkeley
propositions, but not yet on the 4 (???) Alameda County propositions, where it's
much harder to find information.)

<!--more-->

You can also read my thoughts
on [candidates]({{< relref "202011-candidates.md" >}}), or see
a [cheat sheet]({{< relref "202011-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) summary.


## State-wide propositions

### Yes? on 14 (stem cell research bonds)

Not sure on this one.

In 2004, Prop 71 used a bond to raise $3 billion for stem cell research
grants. This money has run out, and this proposition essentially renews it by
raising another $5.5 billion for stem cell research.

On the one hand, I'm generally a sucker for "raise taxes or sell bonds to fund
something decent", and stem cell research is something decent. But I'm more
motivated to do so when the proposition comes from our elected government as
opposed to a separate organization. I'm not sure how to evaluate the claim that
this is less necessary these days since Obama relaxed federal constraints on
funding stem cell research.

I'd like to learn more. If I had to choose today, I'd vote yes I guess.


### **YES!!!** on 15 (fix prop 13 for commercial property)

Prop 13 (1978) is the worst set of laws on the books in California. Among other
things, it prevents real estate from being reassessed until it is sold, meaning
that long-term property owners can pay property taxes on 1970s-era assessments
while their newer neighbors pay based on their recent purchase price. (It also
capped property taxes at 1%, requires the legislature to have a 2/3
supermajority to pass state taxes, and required lots of local taxes to be voted
on as propositions --- a big part of why these ballots are so long). This law
slashed local government funding and is the prime reason California has one of
the nation’s worst public school systems.

This year's Prop 15 is a chance to undo a tiny bit of Prop 13. Specifically, it
taxes **commercial** properties (not residential!) worth over $3 million on
their current property value, not their property value at purchase time. It does
not affect residential property taxation, and does not change the 1% cap.  It
will make corporations that have owned property for decades pay taxes at the
same level as their newer competitors across the street, and will raise $6-11
billion for local governments (school districts, cities, transit districts, etc)
annually.  It is, unsurprisingly, supported by most folks who you would expect
to support a functional government, and opposed primarily by Republicans and
organizations focused on not paying taxes. I found it a bit concerning to see
the California NAACP on the no side, but a [bit of
research](https://calmatters.org/politics/2020/09/california-naacp-president-helps-corporate-ballot-measure-campaigns/)
shows that the California NAACP seems to take a bunch of surprising positions on
ballot measures which just happen to coincide with which proposition campaigns
fund their president's consulting firm.

California has long been held back by Prop 13. Let's finally start to fix it.


### Yes on 16 (un-ban affirmative action)

We have not solved racism. Until it was made illegal by Prop 209 in 1996,
affirmative action allowed institutions such as the University of California to
take race into account as one aspect of decision-making in pursuit of outcomes
that better reflect our state's diversity. While it would be great to live in a
world where affirmative action is no longer needed, we continue to live in a
white supremicist society and Prop 209 has been harmful to our attempts to
improve that. Prop 16 would repeal Prop 209. Sounds good to me.

This made it to the ballot from the legislature from a 75-25 vote (no Democrats
voted now). The only reason we have to vote on this at all instead of letting
our legislature determine policy is that the current policy is locked into the
California Constitution from Prop 209.

### **YES!!!** on 17 (voting rights for parolees)

Felony disenfranchisement is one of the main methods of voter suppression
in 2020.  The choice of what is consider a felony vs a misdemeanor (or even not
a crime, like wage theft) is relatively arbitrary as is the choice of where to
focus law enforcement. One in 13 black adults have lost their right to vote due
to felony disenfranchisement laws, compared to only 1 in 56 non-black adults.

In California, we ban people currently imprisoned for a felony from voting as
well as those currently on parole. Prop 17 would provide voting rights to
parolees (while still disenfranchising the incarcerated).

Ideally, we should join Maine and Vermont by allowing all adults to vote and
completely dropping the system of felony disenfranchisement. Voting yes on 17
will let us join such radical leftist states like [North Dakota, Indiana, and
Ohio](https://www.aclu.org/issues/voting-rights/voter-restoration/felony-disenfranchisement-laws-map)
in only stripping voting rights from people currently in prison. It's a step in
the right direction. This proposition was placed on the ballot by 70% of the
legislature.

### Yes on 18 (17-year-olds voting in primaries)

This would allow 17-year-olds to vote in primary elections when they will be 18
by the general election, like in eighteen other states. This makes sense: anyone
who can vote in a general election should be part of the process of determining
who goes on the ballot.

The argument against goes like this: "I am the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers
Association and I broke California so that all local taxes need to be voted on
via propositions. Some of these propositions are in primaries. So I don't want
17-year-olds, who are more motivated to ensure that the government serves its
citizens than greedy rich people like me, voting on those propositions."

It's kinda fair to point out that propositions in primary elections don't have
the same relationship to the general election that candidates do. But the
solution to this would be to reduce the amount of our governing that happens via
proposition, and perhaps to move all propositions to the general election (where
they will be considered by a larger electorate). This is of course not what the
opponents of this proposition are arguing for, because they are the reason we
have to vote on all these taxes in the first place.


### Yes on 19 (close one prop 13 loophole, open another)

OK, remember 1978's Prop 13, from Prop 15 above? The awful law that destroyed
funding for local governments by (unlike every other state) basing property
taxes on the last purchase price rather than a current assessed value?

The basic operation of the Prop 13 property tax system is that taxes get based
on the current value of the property when the property is sold. But later
propositions have added two big loopholes to this, which allow taxes to be paid
at the old low rate even after the property is transferred!

First, there's an inheritance loophole. If you transfer your primary residence
to your kids (or to your grandkids if their parents are dead), then they get to
keep your old property tax assessment... even if they just rent it out. And this
applies to any other property (residential or otherwise) that you transfer to
them that is worth under a million dollars, and applies in part to more
expensive property.  I have some sympathy for "we can't afford to move into the
house my parents built because the property taxes just went up", but not for "my
parents owned ten rental properties and I need to inherit their business' tax
rate".

Second, there's a loophole for seniors, disabled folks, and disaster victims who
are downsizing. If one of these folks moves within their county (or to another
county which opts in to allowing this) to a home that's not more expensive, they
can keep paying taxes based on their old home's old assessed value rather than a
newly assessed value on their new home. They can do this once ever. This is
vaguely reasonable too (at least in the context of Prop 13 existing in the first
place) --- old folks shouldn't feel stuck in a big home because downsizing will
raise their taxes.  (You may remember this loophole from [Prop 5 from 2018]({{<
relref "201811-props.md" >}}), which would have expanded it in a bunch of
ways. I opposed that proposition and it failed.)

OK, so what does Prop 19 do? Prop 19 **shrinks the inheritance loophole** and
**expands the senior loophole**.

It shrinks the inheritance loophole by making it only apply to a property that
the kid (or grandkid) is going to use for their own primary home (or as a
farm). Additionally, it only applies 100% to properties worth under a million
dollars; for more expensive properties, the taxable value will go up (but not by
as much as if the loophole didn't exist at all). So this loophole stops meaning
that you can inherit your parent's landlord business without being reassessed,
or inherit their home and just rent it out without being reassessed. I think
this still captures the most helpful part of the loophole (making it easier to
keep the house you grew up in) while still moving us inch by inch towards a
post-Prop-13 world where neighbors with similar properties get taxed equally.

It expands the senior loophole by letting them use it three times instead of
just once; by letting them upgrade to a more expensive home (their taxable value
will increase by the difference in current value between two homes); and by
letting them move anywhere in California. This is basically what Prop 5 two
years ago (which I did not support) tried to do.

(There's a weird thing where some of the money indirectly saved is dedicated to
fire protection. While this is all about affecting the amount of property taxes
directed to *local* governments, if this succeeds in sending more property tax
money to school district, the state may have to spend less money on those
districts; any savings from that gets allocated to fire prevention. Tying
revenue directly to uses is something I don't love but it's how things work in
California, I guess.)

I am not exactly excited about this proposition. I think the changes to the
inheritance loophole are positive, and the changes to the senior loophole are
negative. On the whole, I think it's slightly positive.

More importantly for me, the path to the ballot was very different for this
proposition than for 2018's Prop 5. That time, it got on the ballot because the
California Association of Realtors wrote it and got signatures for it. This one
got here because the 70% of the legislature voted for it (only two Democrats
voted no, though a reasonable number did not vote). When I don't have a strong
opinion about a legislatively initiated proposition with near-unanimous
Democratic support, I err on the side of yes.


### **NO** on 20!!! (more felonies, less parole)

After decades of using the proposition process to make criminal justice more
harsh via tactics like the three strikes law, we've finally started to
successfully pass propositions that reduce the prison-industrial complex, like
2014's Prop 47 (which reduces many non-violent crimes to misdemeanors) and
[2016's Prop 57]({{< relref "201611-ca-props.md" >}}) (which makes more people
eligible for parole).

Prop 20 is an attempt to roll back these improvements by making parole harder to
access (among other things). It is funded by prison guard and cop unions (and,
apparently, Safeway).

Especially in a time when Covid is ravaging our jails and prisons, rolling back
these positive changes is not what we need. Vote no on 20.


### Yes on 21 (allow more rent control)

This is a more limited version of the failed [Prop 10 from 2018]({{< relref
"201811-props.md" >}}), so I'll mostly borrow what I wrote then. That said, I no
longer consider this to be a particularly difficult choice.

This reduces the power of all three aspects of Costa-Hawkins, the state law
limiting how local governments can impose rent control.

Specifically, Costa-Hawkins bans:

- Rent control in buildings newer than a fixed date in the past. That's 1995 for
  most of the state, though earlier in places which already had rent control on
  the books (1979 in SF, 1980 in Berkeley and Oakland).
- Rent control in single family homes.
- Vacancy control: any control over what rent a landlord can set for new tenants.

Prop 21 will change each of these bits:

- It continues to ban rent control in new buildings, but it does so on a rolling
  basis: Instead of having a fixed date (35-41 years in the past now) for what
  "new" means, it would ban rent control on any buildings constructed in the
  last 15 years.
- Rent control can apply to single family homes, but not those whose owner only
  owns one or two residential properties.
- Vacancy control is allowed, but a vacancy control law can't stop landlords
  from raising rents by 15% for new tenants (or during the new tenants' first
  three years).

Nothing in Prop 21 requires local governments to enact rent control; it just
gives them more options if they choose to.

I think the fixed date aspect of Costa-Hawkins is clearly problematic.  That
date was set 25 years ago and hasn't changed. I understand that housing
development can be challenging if rents on new buildings are strictly
controlled, but if you can't figure out how to turn a profit within 15 years
then maybe you shouldn't be a developer.

Rent control without vacancy control has the clear downside that it incentivizes
landlords to evict tenants or, in localities with eviction control, make living
in the building unbearable until tenants leave.  There are downsides to vacancy
control (if too strict it can make it unaffordable to maintain buildings) but
we've had the experiment of vacancy decontrol for 25 years; I'd like to see us
try it again.

The main argument against Prop 21 is that rent control allows local governments
to prevent housing development by instituting strict rent control. But local
governments have plenty of other ways (especially downzoning) to prevent
development much more directly. (And frankly I'm getting less rah-rah about
market-rate development by the year.) Even East Bay For Everyone (the East Bay
YIMBY group) supports Prop 21.  So I'll vote yes on Prop 21.


### **NO!!!** on 22 (let uber mis-classify employees)

Uber, Lyft, and other "gig economy" apps rake in money for their investors and
tech employees by capitalizing on an ever-shifting pool of disempowered drivers
doing the real work (and wearing out their cars). These companies insist that
the people providing the actual labor are independent contractors rather than
employees, allowing them to skirt labor laws like the minimum wage, paid sick
leave, and health care benefits.

The legislature passed AB5, a bill that requires many employers to classify the
people whose work is essential to their business as employees. This law was
specifically aimed at companies like Uber and Lyft.

Now, AB5 isn't perfect. It overreaches and affects industries that it's not as
appropriate for, like the performing arts (though performing artists sadly have
bigger problems in 2020). The bill's author, Lorena Gonzalez, has pledged to
work to amend the law to avoid unintentional impacts like this, though I don't
know how well this has gone.

Prop 22 is the attempt by Uber, Lyft, Doordash, Instacart, and Postmates (among
others) to overturn AB5... but just for them. Yes, somehow despite the fact that
AB5 has gotten tons of bad press for how it may affect industries other than the
gig economy companies, Uber et al has put forth a proposition that only
overturns AB5 for app-based rideshare and delivery companies. So all the
unintended consequences in other industries would carry on; just these apps
would be exempted.

There's a bit of a fig leaf around mandating some minimal benefits for
drivers. But let's be honest: any driver benefits in the law written by the
companies are benefits that aren't a big deal for them to offer, not serious
concessions.

I am sympathetic to the argument that AB5 hurts people who really do just want
to use gig economy apps for a little bit of extra work here and there. (Of
course, in an ideal world many of the things mandated by AB5 like support for
health care wouldn't be employment-linked in the first place. But we aren't in
that ideal world.) But at the end of the day, Uber drivers (whether part-time or
full-time) have very little collective power, because the app companies work
hard to make sure that drivers aren't able to coordinate with each other in any
direct way.

I'd be fine with going back to a pre-AB5 world where companies could treat their
work force as contractors... if drivers had a voice at the table via collective
bargaining. Let your drivers have a union, and the state won't have to step in
and make crude changes like AB5.

But until then, let's see how AB5 actually works in practice. (We don't know yet
because the companies have been refusing to start following the law.) If it
truly is ruinous, it can be legislatively reversed later. Please vote no on Prop
22.

### ? on 23 (dialysis clinic changes)

So there's an ongoing conflict between for-profit dialysis centers and the
unions that are trying to help their employees organize. Somehow this turns into
a series of union-sponsored propositions. I liked the last one of these, [Prop 8
in 2018]({{< relref "201811-props.md" >}}), which would have capped dialysis
center profits if it had passed. This one adds a few regulations to dialysis
centers: requires there to be an on-site physician (or another medical
professional if there aren't enough doctors in the area) at all times;
prohibiting discrimination based on whether the patient has private or public
insurance; requiring state approval before closing clinics; and some stuff
around data collection.

The non-discrimination clause seems great. The others seem maybe fine I
guess. Or maybe the physician part is overkill. I dunno. Newspaper editorial
boards mostly don't like it. Some organizations I respect (though don't always
agree with) like [Bend the
Arc](https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/jewishaction/pages/14965/attachments/original/1601570982/2020BendTheArcCA-VoterGuide-1012020.pdf?1601570982)
and [Indivisible
SF](https://indivisiblesf.org/nov-2020-california-ballot-propositions) are in
favor?

Basically torn between "in a fight between the union and big business, choose
big business" and "when a proposition could just be a normal law, vote no".


### No on 24 (privacy law changes)

So this one guy, Alastair Mactaggart, was working to put a privacy-related
proposition on the ballot in 2018. He negotiated with the legislature, and
agreed to withdraw it when they passed a big privacy law (the CCPA).

Then he went and put this one on the 2020 ballot anyway. It extends the CCPA
further, and locks it into place so only another proposition can amend it.

The actual contents are complex and technical. This is the sort of thing that
absolutely needs to be amendable by the legislature. I'm not even interested in
learning what the details here are: the process is bad enough to ensure my
opposition. Opposition from the ACLU and LWV seals the deal for me.


### Yes? on 25 (keep law ending cash bail)

OK, so two years ago the legislature passed SB10, which would eliminate cash
bail in California. The bail bond industry filed signatures to create a
referendum. What this means is that the law didn't take effect, and instead we
get to vote on whether or not it takes effect. A yes vote makes SB10 take effect
(eliminating cash bail); a no vote rolls it back.

Cash bail is an unfair system that traps the poor in jail while rich folks
accused of the same crime get to go home, and the bail bond industry is
predatory and creates no real societal value. I'm generally in favor of
eliminating cash bail.

That said, my impression is that SB10 was significantly changed in the process
of getting passed, and many folks (like the ACLU) went from sponsoring SB10 to
opposing it on its final vote, primarily due to concerns that increasing the
discretionary power given to judges and algorithmic risk assessment tools will
lead to the same sorts of discrimination as cash bail. We can do better than
SB10.

That said, as far as I can tell most of those groups (including the ACLU) still
support voting yes on SB10 rather than siding with the bail bond industry in
rolling the entire thing back.

I don't know how realistic it is to be optimistic that SB10 will be amended to
improve its problems, but I do suspect that if Prop 25 fails, California won't
try eliminating cash bail again for a long time.  So I think I'm voting yes.


## Alameda County propositions

Unlike Berkeley, the county does not appear to have information on their
propositions available online as of October 1st, and I am not even sure that the
two propositions listed below are the only non-state non-Berkeley propositions
on the ballot.

### Yes? on V (continue unincorporated area utility tax)

I have had trouble finding detailed information about this proposition or
opinions about it. My impression is that it continues an existing tax that will
expire. It only applies to folks in the unincorporated areas of the county but
is voted on by everyone. I hope to research it more fully once my county voter
guide arrives, but I'm generally in favor of continuing existing taxes.


### Yes? on W (sales tax for housing/homelessness)

I have had trouble finding detailed information about this proposition or
opinions about it. My impression is that is a sales tax that will fund something
related to housing and homelessness. I hope to research it more fully once my
county voter guide arrives. Sales taxes are regressive but as of now I am voting
yes.

### Yes? on X (bonds for fire departments)

I have had trouble finding detailed information about this proposition or
opinions about it. I hope to research it more fully once my county voter guide
arrives.

### Yes? on Y (borrow funds for schools)

I have had trouble finding detailed information about this proposition or
opinions about it. I hope to research it more fully once my county voter guide
arrives.


## Berkeley propositions

Berkeley helpfully has a [site with all of its proposition text and
arguments](https://www.cityofberkeley.info/Ballot_Measure_Information.aspx).

I am currently planning to vote yes on all 8 Berkeley-specific propositions.

### Yes on FF (fire/emergency tax)

I object to the [Prop 13 requirement that all local taxes require voter
approval](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1978_California_Proposition_13#Voting_Requirements_Local_Taxes)
and generally believe in supporting any tax that City Council unanimously puts
on the ballot. While I certainly have my concerns about some of what City
Council does, I do not believe the repetitive arguments that my city's anti-tax
zealots put forth on every single tax proposition. The causes supported by this
tax seem reasonable and the amount isn't high. The argument against this tax
makes the highly misleading claim that this will "double" taxes; while perhaps
it will double *the part of our square-footage-based taxes that pays for fire
and paramedics*, that's not the same as doubling taxes overall! For my home I
believe this will increase my taxes by 2%.


### Yes on GG (uber tax)

As described in FF, I generally vote for taxes that City Council unanimously
supported (Davila abstained from this one but that's close enough), though I do
think a little more carefully when it's not just a simple property tax. I did
occasionally use Lyft before covid, but believe it's appropriate to tax Lyft and
Uber to support local governments, as Chicago does and Oakland tried to. Fifty
cents seems like a fine amount.


### Yes on HH (utility tax)

Third tax in a row supported by a unanimous City Council and opposed only by the
same gang of anti-taxers. This one raises taxes that we pay on our gas and
electric bills, which are a percentage of the bill cost (so conserving energy
can help you pay less of this tax). It also exempts low-income folks in two
programs that help pay utility bills from the entire tax (not just the new
part!). I probably would have voted for it even without the second part, but
making this tax less regressive seems like a positive change in and of
itself. So yes!


### Yes on II (police accountability)

This proposition replaces the Police Review Commission with a Police
Accountability Board. It was placed on the ballot by a unanimous City Council,
and apparently was part of a collaboration between the City Council, the
existing Police Review Commission, and the police department. At least according
to the argument in favor, it expands the review powers of the organization,
doing things like extending the deadline for filing complaints, requiring
officers to testify, etc. It does appear that the only action it can take are
"recommendations"; if the BPD disagrees with the Board's determination, the City
Manager makes the final choice. There are no official arguments against this
proposition and it is supported by groups like the Berkeley ACLU and
NAACP. While I can't say I fully understand the details of how the new Board
will be different from the old Commission, it sounds good to me.


### Yes? on JJ (mayor and council pay)

Berkeley City Council members currently receive a salary of $38K and the Mayor
receives a salary of $61K. This proposition would change the formula to one that
currently results in $67K for Council members and $107K for the Mayor. With the
current cost of living in Berkeley, it is challenging for our elected officials
to treat their office as a full time job unless their family has another source
of income or they are just wealthy. I do believe that paying elected officials
well can allow for a more diverse (and slightly less bribeable!) government as
well as letting them focus on their office. So I am planning to vote yes on
this.

I would be even more excited to vote for this if it had a delayed start date
(say, taking effect in 2 years after the next local election) to make it more
clear that this is thinking about the future Council composition, not just the
folks who voted to put it on the ballot. But it's still generally a good idea.


### Yes on KK (update city charter)

KK seems to be a bunch of mostly technical amendments to the City Charter:
gender-neutral language (yay!), changing who can be on a commission to be
inclusive of non-citizens (which is also required by state law), defining what
the City Attorney does more clearly, etc. Maybe the most interesting part is no
longer requiring firefighters to live within 40 miles of Berkeley, which is
something that I don't have strong opinions about. (I do think it's better when
cops live where they work, but I'm not sure the same concerns apply to
firefighters.) The City Council voted unanimously for this. Sounds fine.


### YES on LL (let us spend our budget)

Because the California constitution has been mangled by greedy anti-tax
anti-civilization assholes, every city needs to pass this ballot measure every 4
years in order to actually use tax money that has already been voted on. All it
does is say "Those taxes you're paying?  We're allowed to spend that money even
though it's more than our budget was in 1986".  If this fails, we'll still be
paying the same taxes but the city will be forced to sit on part of the money
for no good reason. (This answer copied from [2016's V1]({{< relref
"201611-local-props.md" >}}) and I assume I'll write it again in 2024, assuming
we still have a democracy then.)

(The only positive thing about this proposition is that I see Orlando Martinez
is one of the few people who think we should vote against it, which means I
don't even have to bother to research his City Council candidacy.)

### Yes on MM (more rent control)

Of the 8 Berkeley propositions, this one requires the most thought for me. (I
believe it's the only one put on the ballot by a City Council vote where any
Council member voted no.)  It does three different things:

- Ensures that rent payment not paid due to legally declared states of emergency
  (like the one we are in now) does not retroactively become cause for eviction
  after the state of emergency ends.
- Requires landlords whose properties are not eligible for rent control to
  register them with the Rent Board, including a fee (which hypothetically may
  only cover costs). If you're just renting out your primary residence for less
  than two years, you don't have to do this.
- Clarifies that the ADU (accessory dwelling unit, eg backyard cottage)
  exemption from rent control only covers properties with one single-family
  house and one ADU (which was the only legal way to create an ADU when the ADU
  exemption passed, but which has changed).

As somebody who generally supports rent control, these all seem basically reasonable.

An eviction moratorium does not actually help tenants if they will be evicted as
soon as the moratorium ends for the same missed payments that they couldn't pay
before (vs being evicted for continued missed payments post-moratorium or for
other cause, which is not affected by this proposition). Of course in an ideal
world, landlords would also be able to obtain similar mortgage relief, and that
is the case for the current state eviction moratorium.

Getting more information about rentals in the city seems like it would be a
largely positive change.

And if you have multiple ADUs, or an ADU next to an apartment building, it does
seem like this "ADU" should just be treated more like an apartment rather than a
special case.

