---
date: 2020-11-03T12:00:01Z
title: 'November 2020: Candidates'
menu:
  main:
    name: Nov 2020 Candidates
    weight: 4
---

Here are my current thoughts on candidates on the November 2020 ballot in
Berkeley, in ballot order. (I have not yet fully researched the candidates for
this election.)

<!--more-->

You can also read my thoughts
on [propositions]({{< relref "202011-props.md" >}}), or see
a [cheat sheet]({{< relref "202011-cheat-sheet.md" >}}) summary.


## President and Vice President: JOE BIDEN AND KAMALA HARRIS

Only one ticket with a chance at winning is not primarily motivated by
malevolence, spite, and bigotry. I sure didn't vote for either of these
candidates in March, but I'm sure voting for them now.


## US Representative, D13: BARBARA LEE

Still great. Though y'know, she could join "the Squad" on a few issues. But
still great.


## State Assembly, D15: Buffy Wicks

While I voted for Jovanka Beckles in both 2018 elections, I never bought into
the caricature of Buffy Wicks put forward by Beckles' supporters. While I would
have preferred to elect somebody with a deeper connection to the district and
with a more diverse campaign, I think Wicks has been a pretty good
representative and [got some good laws
passed](https://twitter.com/BuffyWicks/status/1300614466128633856) (or at least
almost passed: some of these failed due to weird last minute shenanigans where
they passed both houses but didn't get reconciled).

While I like the other "candidate", Sara Brink, and voted for her in the primary
(Republicans have no business being on my ballot), she is not really running for
this office. Her [campaign website](https://www.sarabrinkforad15.com/) literally
starts with "this race does not matter". I agree with most of what she says on
her campaign site and hope this is not the last time I hear from her, but I'll
probably vote for the actual candidate in this election.


## Superior Court Judge, Office 2: Elena Condes?

I haven't done further research into this office since the primary.

Both of the candidates appear to be basically fine.  Condes has way more
endorsements than Fickes, but Fickes has a handful.  They are both LGBT and seem
to have split the LGBT org endorsements. Fickes has a pretty varied career;
Condes has focused primary on defense. In general I think our courts should have
more judges with a background in defense, so combining that with the
endorsements, I'm voting for Condes. But I'm not voting against anyone here!


## Berkeley School Directors: (choose 2)?

I've only done a small amount of research so far; currently leaning towards
Laura Babbitt and Ana Vasudeo.

## Berkeley Rent Board: (choose 5)?

I've only done a small amount of research so far, but I usually end up voting
for something close to the tenant slate, which this year is Xavier Johnson, Andy
Kelley, Mari Mendonca, Leah Simon-Weisberg, and Dominique Walker. (All but
Mendonca fall into that "if the East Bay DSA and East Bay For Everyone agree,
how wrong can it be?" category.)

## AC Transit Director (at-large): Victoria Fierce?

writeup tk

## AC Transit Director, Ward 1: **JOVANKA BECKLES!**

writeup tk (but go look at my 2018 discussion of Beckles for Assembly, where my
hesitations were around housing, and this is not a housing-centric position)


## AC Transit Director, Ward 2 (not my district): **JEAN WALSH!**

writeup tk


## BART Director, D7: **LATEEFAH SIMON!**

Lateefah Simon has been an excellent BART supervisor. (District 7 is a strange
district that contains a huge chunk of the East Bay from West Oakland out to the
Carquinez Bridge, and also a bunch of SF from the Bayview through eastern SOMA;
SF has enough population for 2.5 districts so the map gets drawn this way.)

Sharon Kidd is running against her. Her entire campaign is about being
pro-police. No thanks.

## BART Director, D1 (not my district): JAMIE SALCIDO

writeup tk


## East Bay Regional Park District Director, Ward 1: ?

Elizabeth Echols was appointed to this seat in January when the previous
director retired due to illness. So she is only technically running for
"re-election".

Just from reading the two candidates' [campaign](https://elizabeth4parks.org/)
[sites](http://laforceofcourse.org/), Norman La Force seemed like the clear best
candidate. Echols is a former Obama administration official whose career is
interesting but not particularly focused on East Bay parks. Her endorsements
come from a lot of people I respect but on the whole leans a little bit towards
the "moderate" (for this area) side. La Force has a deep history of involvement
with the East Bay parks, including being one of the main people behind the
creation of McLaughlin Eastshore State Park (that wild park on the way to the
Berkeley marina). He's got the more "progressive" side of the endorsement slate,
which is where I tend to lean especially on issues that aren't directly
housing-related. (Though... one of the big issues here is the development of
Point Molate for housing, which he opposes. I don't know where I fall on that
project --- it's certainly not a very transit-accessible place to focus new
development.)

Then I did more research on La Force. [This blog
post](https://milliontrees.me/2020/09/29/on-november-3rd-vote-for-a-friend-of-the-east-bay-parks/)
is a long anti-La Force polemic. For the most part I'm taking it with a grain of
salt. It seems to mostly be a guy who has strong feelings against the removal
non-native trees like eucalyptus; I'm not an expert on these issues but mostly
am anti-eucalyptus. That said, some of the things La Force has done that are
brought up in this post do trouble me. La Force's SPRAWLDEF group sued to block
the creation of the new Bay Trail segment behind Golden Gate Field (which I
love), according to [this Berkeleyside
op-ed](https://www.berkeleyside.com/2013/02/04/unexpected-opposition-from-environmentalists-to-bay-trail)... although... maybe
the op-ed is being disingenuous? Because the [actual filing it links
to](http://www.well.com/user/pk/CDAWGS/Documents/SPRAWLDEF-filing.pdf) doesn't
talk about the path at all. Maybe the path was just going to be collateral
damage? Also, apparently when he boasts about doubling the size of the Point
Isabel dog park, he's hiding that he tried to stop it from being an off-leash
dog park at all. I'm not really a dog person but I know that Point Isabel is a
wildly popular off-leash dog park, and I do think there's a place for off-leash
dog parks even though I'd prefer that not all parks work that way.  The people
who don't like La Force characterize him as being opposed to people using parks.

I am pretty torn at this point. Based on endorsements and overall character, I
lean towards La Force, but his opinions about specific parks that I know are
opposed to mine. Leaning towards voting for Echols or abstaining. Would love
advice from anyone who knows more about either of these candidates!


## Berkeley Mayor: ?

I have not been super impressed by Jesse Arreguin's tenure as mayor. He hasn't
been awful, but he hasn't been that great too. On the basis of issues and
policies alone, I'm pretty impressed by the one challenger who seems like he
might stand even a small chance of winning, [Wayne
Hsiung](https://www.wayneformayor.com/). I found Hsiung to be pretty compelling
when he knocked on our door and we talked for a bit.

Hsiung is best known as the founder of the vegan activist group [Direct Action
Everywhere](https://www.directactioneverywhere.com/), something he does not
highlight as part of his campaign. I don't have strong opinions in either
direction about this work itself. But I am definitely concerned by accusations
that [DxE is an abusive cult](https://dismantledxe.wordpress.com/), and about
[sketchy behavior toward a 16 year old when he was
27](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3zUZzBWMS0) (and Hsiung [does not deny
sending her these
emails](https://www.directactioneverywhere.com/theliberationist/2020-5-8-saul-elbein-business-insider-and-the-corruption-of-modern-journalism)). Maybe
this is a conspiracy by the meat industry to make him look bad, but it's
concerning enough that I don't think I'm comfortable voting for him despite
liking his platform.

I may abstain.

## Berkeley City Council, D3: Ben Bartlett #1, Deborah Matthews #2?

writeup tk
