---
date: 2020-02-20T12:00:02-07:00
title: 'March 2020'
menu:
  main:
    name: March 2020
    weight: 2
---

This is a relatively short post. The most controversial election on my ballot is the Presidential primary, and I'm pretty sure most of my friends have plenty of information about that already. All five propositions are "give money to kids?" and seem like easy yeses. There are only a few other contested positions, and most of them are incumbents vs relatively unknown challengers.

County committee and judge seem to be the most interesting offices on this ballot. I haven't had time to research them in full yet (I received my voter guide after early voting started!) or write up my full thoughts, but friends have already been asking my opinions, so here's my current thoughts. I hope to flesh this out further next week.

Here are my current recommendations in ballot order.

<!--more-->

what|my vote
--:|:-----
President | Bernie Sanders (or maybe Elizabeth Warren)
County Committee, D15 | Alfred Twu, 7 others TBA
US Representative, D13 | BARBARA LEE
State Senate, D9 | NANCY SKINNER
State Assembly, D15 | Sara Brink??? (primary-specific decision)
Superior Court Judge, Office 2 | ???
Alameda County Supervisor, D5 | Nick Pilch???
13 (school construction bonds) | Yes
Alameda County C (sales tax for kids healthcare and preschool) | **YES!**
Berkeley E (teacher property tax) | **YES!**
Berkeley G (school construction bonds) | **YES!**
Berkeley H (school maintenance property tax) | **YES!**

A quick note on how these elections work.

Statewide elections use the "top two primary": of the three candidates for Assembly, two will definitely end up on the ballot in November. In practice, this means that the Assembly race is a race between Brink (independent) and Solnordal (Republican) to see who will challenge Wicks (Democratic incumebent) in November. (This also applies to the US Representative and State Senate races, but neither race has more than 2 candidates, so barring a miracle of write-in votes, we know exactly what those races will look like in November.)

On the other hand, the local County Supervisor and Judge races are "non-partisan elections". On the surface, they look similar: candidates are listed without parties, and no more than two will make it to the November ballot. However, if any candidate gets 50% of the vote, they win outright without a November election at all. So (barring a tie or write-in shenanigans) this is the only election we will have for the County Supervisor seat, and the Judge election may or may not continue to November.

The County Committee race (where 8 will win) takes place entirely on this ballot. Note that you must be a registered Democrat to vote in this race; being an independent voter who requests a Democratic Presidential ballot is not enough.
