---
date: 2016-10-16T12:32:38-07:00
draft: true
menu: main
title: My Biases
---

We all go into the ballot booth with our own background and biases. This is my
general political worldview. If this doesn't sound much like you, you probably
don't need to read this site at all.

I don't believe that voting and organization around the electoral mechanism is
the only or the best way to achieve positive change in our society or our
government. But I do believe it is one way and one worth taking seriously.  I do
my best to research every candidate and question on my ballot for every
election, and come to a well-informed position. I am sharing my opinions on this
site because friends have noticed that I care a lot and often ask for my
opinions. I don't think my opinions are always the most well-informed or
correct, but given that I have them, I might as well share them. (I have done
this for years on private locations like LiveJournal and Facebook; for November
2016 I'm experimenting with doing it more publicly.) I try to ensure that "have
strong opinions about my ballot" is not my only contribution to making our
society a better place, but do not always live up to that standard.

I'm a thirty-something cis white Jewish man living in Berkeley, California. I'm
the father of a tiny baby who I intend to send to our local public schools. I
formerly rented in the Mission and SOMA in San Francisco. I work at a VC-funded
startup in San Francisco; before 2012 I worked at a larger tech company and rode
the buses down the peninsula. My wife and I own our home. I commute daily via
BART and rely primarily on walking, BART, biking, and SF Muni to get around. We
do not own a car though we occasionally borrow one from family or ZipCar and
(rarely) use Lyft or taxis.

I hope for candidates to match to match my personal beliefs more and more
closely as their district shrinks.  So I often find myself excited about
presidential candidates who are farther from my beliefs than local candidates
who I am opposed to.

I generally think that government has a role in creating a more equal and fair
society, and that one powerful mechanism of achieving that goal is via
progressive taxation and the creation of social safety nets.  On the whole I
tend to vote in favor of most taxes and bonds.  I believe that the restrictions
written into the California constitution by anti-tax forces in Proposition 13
and its cohort have had a corrosive force on the state, and wish they did not
force so much of Californian financial decision-making into the ballot box.

I endeavor to support equality and justice for people of all races, religions,
genders, sexual orientations, classes, etc. I do my best to be a good ally,
though that is an ongoing process, not a status I can claim.


I am a strong supporter of abortion rights, marriage equality, trans rights, and
gun control.

I support the rights of undocumented immigrants, such as my great-grandmother
after whom we named my daughter.

I am fully aware that I am a white person who recently moved into a historically
black neighborhood (though my wife has lived in the neighborhood off and on for
decades) and that makes me part of the problem of gentrification. I do my best
to counteract that effect via respect for my neighbors and via the ballot box,
but acknowledge that this may not be fully possible.

While I can find plenty to criticize about the Democratic Party (like any
organization of its size and diversity), I believe on the whole it is the
organization most devoted to electorally accomplishing the sort of change I want
to see in our country's government.  While I do consider candidates on their own
merits, I have historically nearly always ended up voting for Democrats in
contested races.  (I would have voted for Nader in 2000 had I been a year older;
I also would have regretted that vote within weeks.) I'd like to see a system
with more competitive parties and I do evaluate third-party and independent
candidates for local positions. That said, I don't find presidential candidates
from parties who do not have the organization, dedication, or representation to
get even a handful of state legislators elected to be worth considering.  I have
been fortunate to live in municipalities since 2002 which use instant-runoff
voting for local elections and hope to see more of it in the future.

I generally indicate how strongly I feel about my position on an issue by
WHETHER OR NOT I CAPITALIZE MY OPINION.

XXX may update, link to GitHub 
